---
title: 'kuibit: Analyzing Einstein Toolkit simulations with Python'
tags:
  - Python
  - Einstein Toolkit
  - Cactus
  - numerical relativity
  - astrophysics
authors:
  - name: Gabriele Bozzola
    orcid: 0000-0003-3696-6408
    affiliation: "1"
affiliations:
 - name: Steward Observatory and Astronomy Department, University of Arizona
   index: 1
date: 1 January 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

`kuibit` [^0] is a Python library for analyzing simulations performed
with the `Einstein Toolkit`[^1] [@einsteintoolkit, @einsteintoolkit2], a free
and open-source code for numerical relativity and relativistic astrophysics.
Over the past years, numerical simulations like the ones enabled by the
`Einstein Toolkit` have become a critical tool in modeling, predicting, and
understanding several astrophysical phenomena, including binary black hole or
neutron star mergers. As a result of the recent detections of gravitational
waves by the LIGO-Virgo collaboration, these studies are at the forefront of
scientific research. The package presented in this paper, `kuibit`, provides an
intuitive infrastructure to read and represent the output of the `Einstein
Toolkit`. This simplifies analyzing simulations and significantly lowers the
barrier in learning how to use the tool.

# Statement of need

The `Einstein Toolkit` is a software for numerical simulations based on the
`Cactus` computational framework [@cactuscode] and designed to be accessible for
both users and developers. Numerical-relativity simulations require large and
complex codes, which have to run on the worldâ€™s largest supercomputers.
`Einstein Toolkit` significantly reduces this complexity and improves
accessibility by splitting infrastructure code from physics one. On one side,
there is memory management, parallelization, grid operations, and all the other
low-level details that are needed to successfully perform a simulation but do
not strictly depend on the physical system under consideration. On the other,
there are the physics modules, which implement the scientific aspects of the
simulation. Codes are developed by domain-experts and researchers can focus on
their goals without having to worry about the technical details of the
implementation. This makes the `Einstein Toolkit` easier to use and extend.

Despite the advancements made by the `Einstein Toolkit`, there is still a big
leap between running a simulation and obtaining scientific results. The output
from the `Einstein Toolkit` is a collection of files with different formats and
structures, with data that is typically spread across multiple files (one or
more for each MPI process) in various directories (one per checkpoint). Reading
the simulation output and properly combining all the data is a challenging task.
Even once the output is read, traditional data structures are not a good
representation of the physical quantities. For instance, representing variables
defined on an adaptive-mesh-refined grid as simple arrays completely ignores all
the information on the grid structure, making some operations impractical or
impossible to perform. The lack of suitable interfaces introduces significant
friction in exploring the scientific content of a simulation. `kuibit` takes
care of both the aspects of reading the simulation data and of providing
high-level representations of the data that closely follows what researchers are
used to. In addition to this, `kuibit` also includes a set of routines that are
commonly used in the field: for example, it handles unit conversion (including
from geometrized units to physical), it has the noise curves of known detectors,
or it computes gravitational-waves from simulation data.

`kuibit` is based on the same design (and in various cases, implementation
details too) of a pre-existing package named `PostCactus` [@pycactus]. Like
`PostCactus`, `kuibit` has two groups of modules. The first is to define custom
data-types for time series, Fourier spectra, multipolar decompositions, and grid
data (both on uniform grids and mesh-refined ones). The second group consists of
the readers, which are a collection of tools to scan the simulation output and
organize it. The main reader is a class `SimDir` which provides the interface to
access all the data in the simulation. For instance, the `timeseries` attribute
in `SimDir` is a dictionary-like object that contains all the time series in the
output. When reading data, `kuibit` takes care of all the low-level details,
like handling transparently simulation restarts, or merging grid data stored in
different files. Therefore, users can easily access the data regardless of how
complicated the structure of the output is. Moreover, `kuibit` does not assume
any particular organization of the output and uses regular expressions to find
the relevant information from filenames or metadata, allowing for flexibility in
the simulation workflow.

Currently, `kuibit` is the only available package for quantitative analysis of
simulations that is free to use and that comes with documentation, tutorials,
and examples. Tools like `VisIt` [@visit] or `rugutils` [@rugutils] focus only
on visualizing grid data, while other packages like `POWER` [@POWER], or
`pyGWAnalysis` [@pyGWAnalysis] only on gravitational-wave data. Capabilities
similar to those of `kuibit` are offered by `SimulationTools`
[@simulationtools], that runs on the proprietary Wolfram Mathematica, and by
`PostCactus` [@pycactus] and `scidata` [@scidata], which, at the moment, do not
support Python3 and do not have documentation. In addition to this, several
research groups develop their own private analysis software.

`kuibit` embraces the core principles of the `Einstein Toolkit`: On one side,
`kuibit` solves the engineering problems of reading and representing `Einstein
Toolkit` data, so that researchers can directly pursue their scientific goals
without having to worry about how the data is stored. With `kuibit`, the entry
barrier into using the `Einstein Toolkit` is the lowest it has ever been, and
students and researchers can inspect and visualize simulations in just a few
lines of code. On the other side, `kuibit` is designed to be a code for the
community: it is free and does not require any proprietary software to run,
it is openly developed with an emphasis on readability and maintainability, and
it encourages contributions.

# Acknowledgments

Gabriele Bozzola is supported by by the Frontera Fellowship by the Texas
Advanced Computing Center (TACC). Frontera [@Frontera2020] is founded by NSF grant
OAC-1818253. This work was in part supported by NSF Grant PHY-1912619 to the
University of Arizona and made use of computational resources provided by the
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) under grant number
TG-PHY190020. XSEDE is supported by the NSF grant No. ACI-1548562. Gabriele
Bozzola wishes to thank Wolfgang Kastaun for publicly releasing his `PostCactus`
package [@pycactus] without which, `kuibit` would not exist.

# References

[^0]: A kuibit (harvest pole) is the tool traditionally used by the Tohono
O'odham people to reach the fruit of the Saguaro cacti during the harvesting
season.

[^1]: While `kuibit` is designed for the `Einstein Toolkit`, most of its
capabilities will work also for all the other codes based on `Cactus`
[@cactuscode]. For instance, it is known that `kuibit` can be used to analyze
`Illinois GRMHD` [@illinoisgrmhd] simulations.

